Oof.
It's healed.
So we got-- I think we've got one submitter.
Um-
Thank you Michael.
Yeah, we've got one submitter and then you, if that works.
Yeah. Fantastic.
I'm sure Perry first. He's online.
So feel free to come up whenever is comfortable for you.
Wonderful. Thank you. We'll make sure we get these chairs out the road.
Just
as a matter of interest, how do you get in here?
Um, I don't remember.
Do you go through-
But through the lifts
So we go over to the bee hive, around-
Yeah
... woodwook tree, yeah.
Right around. Hi, boss.
Hello.
I have to come and say hello.
Boss wants me. Boss wants me.
Along will come-
I think we're on the way now.
Well, so riveting this morning with our-
Oh, he's going to come up.
Oh. Oh, welcome back.
I think he lives in the ground.
All right, we're, uh, we're open. All right. Well, uh, welcome back everyone.
We are continuing this morning's hearings in front of the Social Services and
Community Select Committee. And, uh, first up, we have
Joshua Perry, who's appearing via Zoom.
I
don't
have my notes on either.
Are you sure I didn't pay that? Maybe I did it.
Put it this way, that's not a problem.
It's fine?
I think, um, you just need to turn your microphone on camera. Oh, there you go.
We can see you. Great.
We had image there for a second, now we don't.
We only have image or sound right now.
Thank you.
Oh, there we go. Uh, there we go. We can see you and hear you. Welcome, Josh.
Since 2010,
I've, I've been living on my own, uh, independently, and
my--
Um, I've had to rely on family support.
This legislation,
um,
if it's passed or on the Monday, because at the moment
currently I'm having to, to, um, pay my
public transit with the administration cost
for the, um,
individual coming out. I wonder,
has
this legislation, um,
uh, uh, taken away, um,
the youth parts of disabled people and,
uh, and the rights of the youth
convenience, which was ratified in
2008.
Um, today leaves no clear
path
for families under this legislation,
um,
which also breaches the
Health Act and the Human Rights Act from
1991. Um, at
the end of the day, I'm just
trying to make my own way in the world.
Um, my recommendations
are the Ministry be a community of
disabled people to look at
this legislation and the impact on
families,
as well as a clear 50-year plan
to ensure the viability and the
sustainability of the system and
the national bit
that it has taken.
Yes.
Thank, thank you.
If you have any questions,
please feel free to ask me.
Oh, thank, thank you, Josh. I appreciate it.
Um, anyone got, um, questions for Josh?
Uh, you seem to, you seem to have made yourself clear, so th-thank you, thank you
for making, um, both your written and, and oral submission, Josh.
Appreciate you taking the time to do that, and, um, and it's something we'll, we'll
take into consideration as a committee.
So thank, thank you very much for doing that today.
No problem. Thank you.
Kia ora, Josh.
Thank you.
Thank you, Josh.
See you.
You.
The next, um, submitter is, um, Michael Nolan in person with this.
All right. Uh, welcome, Michael. Uh, thanks for appearing in front of the committee
this afternoon. Um, so we've got, uh, five minutes with you, and when you're ready,
the time is yours.
Wonderful.
Kia ora. Ko Michael Nolan toku ingoa.
Recently moved from the small town of Franz Josef Glacier on the West Coast
to Christchurch with a lived experience of Becker Muscular
Dystrophy.
I'm submitting on the proposed Disability Support Services Bill
on some real concerns I have and the implications on fu-future support
for disabled people across Aotearoa I worry about
the expectation that families will take on more responsibility without
clear or proper financial assessment.
From where I stand, or should I say, flip, that indicates a
shift in responsibility more onto whanau, which is not realistic.
This bill, in its current form, represents a fundamentally flawed approach to
disability support and will lead to negative outcomes for disabled
people across Aotearoa. It's an attempt to provide unrealistic
certainty, particularly around the continuation of funding for family
carers. However, it does so by significantly weakening
rights, protections, and accountability.
Whanau supports need to be backed by a fair and just system that
provides all the support needed for not only disabled people but also
their carers. The overall direction of this proposed bill is not
supportive of disabled people and should not proceed.
A central and deeply concerning feature of the bill is the removal of
access to established complaint mechanisms, specifically the Human
Rights Commission and the Health and Disability Commissioner.
This effectively removes independent avenues for redress without
providing any clear or equivalent alternative.
This is absolutely unjust. It strips disabled people of a key
protection and leaves a significant gap in
accountability.
If a disabled person experiences poor treatment, discrimination,
or harm under the system created by this proposed bill, there is
no clear path to justice, support, or legal representation.
Disabled people will be left without adequate and essential
protection. This proposed bill fails to adequately
recognize or address the risks that can exist within family
care situations. While many whanau provide high-quality, culturally
appropriate, and deeply committed care, not all environments
are safe or supportive. There are circumstances where
neglect, coercion, or misuse of funding can occur.
In removing external complaint pathways while also expanding reliance on
family-based care, the bill does not demonstrate how disabled people
will be safeguarded in situations where care arrangements
are not working or are actively harmful.
Without a clear independent mechanism for monitoring intervention or
advocacy, this creates an unacceptable level of risk for
some of the most vulnerable people in our communities.
Through lack of meaningful engagement of disabled people, this proposed
bill undermines trust and is inconsistent with the
principles of participation and partnership.
An emphasis on fiscal risk and cost containment, including a
suggestion that increased funding may not be feasible or access to
disability support services may need to be reduced, signals a
shift away from a rights-based approach.
The use of a three-year transition
period provides
absolutely no reassurance on outcomes.
There is insufficient
clarity about what any long-term system will look like.
There is a real risk supports will diminish, protections weaken even further,
and disabled people will continue to face increased uncertainty.
Asset or means testing should not be a consideration in
disability support
because it ignores the real needs of disabled people and creates
another unfair and unjust barrier.
Introducing such significant legislative change without a clearly
defined and rights-based end state is not acceptable.
The bill is not fit for purpose. There has been no allowance for
people to think it through, talk with others, and provide
meaningful feedback.
Where is the co-design? Where is the thorough and engaged consultation
with disabled people informed by the lived experience, grounded in
rights, dignity, and inclusion? I sincerely ask
decision-makers to think very carefully about what is being proposed
here, because real consultation takes time.
Time to understand, time to think, time to respond.
Legislation must be co-designed.
Disabled people and their whanau and supporters need to be fully involved,
fully informed, and genuinely listened to by the
decision-makers,
not after the fact, but as part of shaping
what happens next.
Thank you very much, Michael.
Well said.
Thank you for making that submission and
sharing your perspective on the bill. Appreciate it.
Thanks so much.
Safe travels back home.
If that's where you're headed.
Good to have someone from Franz Josef up in Parliament.
Thank you.
Good place.
Yeah.
Right, our next submitter is Kaye Jones, I believe, in person. We have Kaye?
Yes.
Okay.
Welcome. We have you for five minutes this afternoon. Welcome.
Kia ora.
Ko Kaye Jones ahau.
I'm a former policy advisor with questions
about the lack of legislative drafting in this bill.
But I don't want to take the time with that, so I just want
to touch on two points from my submission.
I'll give you the choice. Do I start with opportunities or risks?
Let's go opportunities.
Okay. I thought that would be the case.
Mm-hmm.
So if the committee is wise and recommends sending the bill
back for co-design with people within the community
to strengthen it and to clarify matters, then there's the opportunity
to look more at the training and job opportunities
for disabled people that are currently missing out.
Because I think all of us around this table would like disabled people to be
as independent as they can and earning their own income- Now,
challenges to that
include that government agencies do not, as a matter
of course, have part-time employment.
They do not have a pathway for disabled people who cannot work full-time to be in
that. If there could be an across-the-board system, as
there have been in the past, for working that way through, then you could actually
get more people. Even those people who, some of the submitters
who have cerebral palsy and who have
diction issues,
some of them are very able writers and can use computers.
And with the assistance given with AI these days, there could actually be a lot
of opportunities. But at the moment, there's no resourcing going into it.
So I think that whole thing of working with the communities and
Whakaha Ministry to develop ways to actually
enable disabled people to look after themselves more or
fund it, that would be great. Now, the risks,
we've heard about some of them before, but I'll just mention two names,
Danella Knox
and Janine Albury-Thompson.
Both of them were loving mothers to
autistic daughters who were
incredibly difficult to manage, and both of those mothers
killed their own daughters because of the stress and the burnout and their
inability to cope without support.
Now, unfortunately,
there are many families who may face
similar issues if they are forced into a
situation of caring for adult
disabled people who are challenging.
The last Ministry of Justice
survey in 2021, showing comparison of
crime
between
on adult disabled versus non-disabled populations,
6.5% of disabled adults experienced violence by
family members compared to 2.2% of the general
public.
Now, that whole stress of caring for somebody
is a challenge. I do touch in my bill of the risks
of
sexual assault on disabled women that happens
within communities. That is heightened by pressures to
put people in a situation where they're expected to care for
family and there's no assessment.
If you look at the
Family Violence 2018 Act, there is definitions
in that act and protections that are there that are very
difficult for some disabled adults to access.
So I'd want there to be closer looks at the
risks to the disabled people.
Anyway, I'll stop in case there are any questions because I just have
so many examples.
I might start with one.
Yeah.
And it's been one of me sort of burning away for a while, but I've been waiting for
just some to leave some time to ask it.
So there's a lot of focus on family-
Yeah
... and sort of building a perception that family's going to be forced to do this.
But if I look at clause eight, it says, "The Ministry must take
into account the following principles.
Families, whanau, and other culturally recognized family groups, where
appropriate, have responsibility in the first instance for the well-being of their
members." So it's where appropriate, it's not that they'll be forced to.
I'm sorry, I'm a former public servant.
Where appropriate will be dropped to the bottom of the list.
Where convenient is going to be a much more pragmatic situation.
For example,
I have an adult child who has a minor health issue, not a
major one. If something happened to me and my partner,
my brother would be expected to pick up that because no
criminal record against my brother, has a reasonable income.
But actually has no skills, knowledge, or connection with my
adult child because we're not a close family.
There are lots of loving Maori families who will have that
connection, and there's lots of Pakeha who do not.
I'm sorry to be culturally sort of biased on that, but
appropriate will be assessed on the basis of can they financially
afford it, and is there a criminal record against them?
It won't be on the nature of do they have the skills, the inclination, the
willingness.
And that's as a public servant, I know what those types of tick boxes have.
So I think there needs to be choice.
It shouldn't be on the case of the state deciding who
will be the support. Any disabled person should
be having their say. If that has to be
assisted because they're non-verbal, there are still communication ways.
Most of the people that we're talking about still are able to communicate.
We've heard from a number of people sort of, I've been watching yesterday
and today, people can communicate their wishes,
and they have that right.
Don't treat disabled people as second-class citizens.
I don't think it does. But no, thank you for making that submission and
your perspective on it. Cheers.
Yeah.
Inākuhi.
Thanks, Kaye.
Any other questions?
There are more, but we're just going to have to wait till the next person hopefully
leaves some time for-
Okay. And if we're talking about the billions that's been spent, it's not been
spent in all regions evenly, which I know has been a question you've been asking
people because the Enabling Good Lives is not rolled out across the whole motu.
It's only rolled out in three regions with a start in a couple of other
areas. So if you look at what the government got for $35 million-
Sorry, so we'll-
... in Immigration New Zealand-
We'll have to-
You know
... move to the next speaker
We want effective money.
Yeah. Inākuhi.
Thank you.
Right. Our next speaker is, or next presenter is Magenta.
Also on piece, I believe.
Welcome.
All right. Well, you've got five minutes with you. Fire away when you're ready.
Yeah. Well, I've got a lot to say and a lot of time, so I'll be direct about why
this bill is concerning. The Supreme Court's 2025 ruling opened a pathway for
family carers to seek employment status and rights for the disability support they
provide. This bill closes that pathway.
It extinguishes the 40-plus claims already in progress, blocks any future
employment-related claims, and bars carers and disabled people from bringing
related complaints to Employment Relations Authority, the Employment Court, the
Human Rights Commission, or the Health and Disability Commissioner.
This is not a minor technical fix. It is Parliament overriding a court decision
specifically to stop carers from being recognized and paid as employees.
Legislation that permanently forecloses a court-recognized legal pathway for tens
of thousands of disabled whānau carers deserves a genuinely co-designed, well-being
centered process, not fast track.
I'll focus on family carers and what losing this pathway means for them, for the
people they care for, and for the country's books.
Carers are already underpaid and overworked, propping up an overburdened healthcare
system. Closing off their path to employment rights locks in more unpaid and
unrecognized care, which is dangerous for both carer and disabled person.
Rana Itel's 2026 study, applying theory of caregiver stress to 15 years of
Australian panel data, found carers reported higher happiness than non-carers
when providing under six hours of care a week, but lower happiness once care
exceeded 11 hours a week. The highest burden group, who provided 20-plus hours
weekly, showed the clearest decline in well-being.
This bill, by foreclosing the path to paid recognized work, pushes more carers into
that high hour, low recognition bracket rather than out of it.
Australian research backs this up.
Carers of family members with severe illnesses are more likely to have reduced paid
employment, higher out-of-pocket costs, and greater exposure to economic decline
and financial stress. Underpaid carers also carry a heavier cognitive load,
which compounds poor well-being, meaning stressed, fatigued carers and the people
they care for are both more vulnerable to accidents.
Carers in this position have neither the time nor the resources to look after their
own health. This bill is being sold as fiscal restraint, but Infometrics
2022 analysis for Alzheimer's New Zealand, Carers New Zealand, the Carers
Alliance, IHC, and MSD shows that restraint is an excuse, not a
saving. In this, they noted that one in seven New Zealand adults,
14%, is an unpaid carer. Additionally, there are already
7.9 unpaid carers for every practicing nurse and 9.6 for
every personal care assistant or disability support worker.
A bill that entrenches unpaid family labor as the default rather than a recognized
employment relationship will push that ratio higher still.
Infometrics estimates carers lose between 1.5 and 2.3
billion in employment revenue annually from reduced hours and lost paid work,
and that the government loses 540 to 769
million a year in tax revenue as a direct result.
By legislating away the Crown's status as employer, this government isn't avoiding
the cost. It's choosing to keep it sitting with families instead of recovering even
a fraction of it through a healthier, larger tax-paying workforce.
The 2021 State of Caring survey found many carers are already in financial
distress, less satisfied with life, and critically don't feel valued.
This bill sends them a clear message: that they are a fiscal liability to be
legislated around, not workers deserving of basic employment rights.
Infometrics had some recommendations that point in the other direction completely.
Paid leave, tax credits, KiwiSaver contributions, increased carer support payments,
and access to the supported living payment.
They estimated that meaningful financial and well-being support for carers would
generate 20 to $40,000 per carer per year in
net national well-being benefit for comparatively modest public investment.
Schemes that were already in motion, such as Mana Whaikaha, enhanced individualized
funding, and Enabling Good Lives, were flagged as practical starting points for
exactly this kind of support. But it's worth the committee noting that this
government's track record with these very schemes is a cautionary one.
In March 2024, Whaikaha abruptly restricted what flexible funding could be used
for, citing a budget overspend with no consultation, cutting carers' access
to things like respite.
It took a sustained community consultation and nearly two years of hardship before
those restrictions are finally being unwound from April, with no apology
and no commitment to restoring what families lost in the meantime.
This is the same pattern that this bill risks repeating.
Cut first under fiscal pressure, consult only once the damage is already done.
This government has cut so many jobs and continues to squeeze the poor and disabled
to cover deficits created by giving tax breaks to landlords and tobacco companies.
I'm asking that the committee do not let this bill pass in its current form, not
only for the harm that it does to disabled whānau and their carers, but because
employing these carers properly is a net economic gain, not a
cost, at a time when the government should be creating jobs, not legislating
away the few legal pathways that carers have just won.
I'm happy to send through any references should you like to read
those.
Yeah, we'll-
... definitely. Maureen, quick question.
I note your comment around government
overriding the court decision.
Mm-hmm.
That's actually the system that we live in, in this country.
The Parliament, government, um, writes the
legislation. If it's not clear, the courts make a decision,
then we've got to clarify it. It is not up to the courts to set
legislative, um, priority.
I agree. There does need to be a framework, but it needs to be co-designed and
well-being based, not based on numbers and budgets
that people out there are going to be making.
All right. Thanks, Magina. Thanks for making your submission this
afternoon.
Thank you.
Thank you very much.
Our next submitter is Jasmine, uh, appearing via Zoom.
I'll send you a sign.
You'll be presenting in NZ Sign-
Jasmine, um, do we have a New Zealand Sign Language interpreter as well?
Or is it just-
Yes.
Or is-
We've got interpreters online.
Oh, great. Thank you.
Just wait for a moment there, um, Jasmine.
We just want to make sure we've got the interpreter online,
uh, so we can see them as well.
Excellent. All right. Welcome, Jasmine.
We have now our New Zealand Sign Language interpreter, and the time is yours when
you're ready.
Okay. Thank you.
Yeah, so tena koutou, tena koutou katoa.
Thank you for this opportunity today for me to come and present.
I'll ask the interpreter
who's using sign language today,
and I wanted to mention that because New Zealand Sign Language is one of the
official languages of New Zealand.
So that's why I wanted an interpreter here today to be
able to turn my signs into voice for all of you to understand.
Okay. Thank you.
I oppose this bill.
It is blatant disrespect.
It dishonors Whānau Ora,
Tangata Mai Kaha, Māori Turu, deaf and
disabled people, the United Nations and Disabled People's
Organizations Coalition,
which the government is mandated to listen to.
The coalition commission and publish reports via Donald
Beasley
Institute
on this very topic of disability support services.
The proposed law, under guise of trying to avoid the
responsibility of being an employer,
is rewriting and reframing disability support
services in a way that does not uphold deaf and
disabled people's rights.
If it is anything, it is an admittance that the
current system is failing us and that our government is in
breach of UNCRPD
to propose this
after Minister Upston stated last year that New Zealand is an
international leader in disability rights.
The government deciding what is disability support services
legislation without proper partnership with deaf and disabled community,
that's not the way.
It's obviously not a coincidence that this government does not honor Palestinian
people's rights and Aotearoa's obligations as signatory to the
Geneva Convention.
It's not a coincidence that the government is dishonoring Te Tiriti o
Waitangi and breaching the rights of trans, intersex,
non-binary people.
Government does not get to dictate to us what our gender is or
what our supports are.
It is our right to determine that for ourselves.
I want to show you these
words and art by Ollie Costello,
because I feel it's relevant to
this bill, and it's relevant to other
bills that are currently up for
legislation.
It's called "Letting Go of the Gender Binary,"
and it says, "The gender binary
has its roots in colonization.
It was used as a form of hierarchy and control.
It was and is used.
Yet when we look back at history, we can witness long lineages
of human societies with gender expansive people.
All over the world, we see a dynamic spectrum of plants,
animals, and other living beings embodying the same truth,
that we exist on a planet of beautiful and diverse
possibilities.
No two people ever are the same. Why should our genders be,
or our supports?" For example.
"When we let go of gender binary thinking, it frees us all to be our true
selves. Self-determination is a human right.
When we practice using someone's
pronouns, when we affirm gender expansive existences,
we create networks of care. We create a safer world
for all." It is directly relevant to this bill as
well.
So how can our government do the right thing?
Roll out the bill. Start from scratch.
Build legislation with us.
Implement these recommendations
that are made.
Let
Donald Beasley Institute
publish this on behalf of the DPO coalition.
It has all of the recommendations that are from us
deaf and disabled people.
Toitū teriti, free Palestine. Ka mihi.
Any questions, anyone?
All right. You seem to have made your points, Jasmine.
Thanks for presenting to the committee this afternoon.
Thank you.
All right, the next submitter is Deidre in person.
It wasn't updated when I was given.
Right.
I think that's perfect.
Sorry, didn't realize.
That's
all
right.
Next.
Deidre.
Kia ora.
Uh, kia ora. Welcome.
Hold on.
All right, we have, uh, five minutes with you this afternoon, so when you're ready,
come on right in.
Gee. Mm.
Yeah, so kia ora. My name's Deidre.
I'm a financially solo caregiver for a beautiful,
intelligent, funny person.
Uh, we receive disability support services through
individualized funding. Um, professionals have told
me I support an incredibly complex situation.
And what I've experienced is that the
compartmentalization and inflexibility of our
various health, mental health, social welfare, tax, and
education systems is actually disabling.
These systems could enable, but they're not fully designed for the
breadth of impairments, and nor are they adequately funded.
I work in the community and social services sector,
and I find the system's opaque and impenetrable.
I can't figure it out for myself.
Um, so yeah, it just has far-reaching impacts.
Um,
in terms of this bill, I'm concerned about the human rights aspects.
Um, I think this bill is at odds with the Universal
Declaration on Human Rights and the Convention on the Rights of Persons
with Disabilities.
I'm incredibly concerned about clauses 8
(2)
and 11 (3) of the bill. Um,
the way they're written, I see that they could enable means or asset testing in the
future. I would really like them removed.
The, um,
the r- you know, the way this bill, you know, we had such a short time
to respond. There hasn't, in my opinion, been
adequate consultation with the disability community.
And so I cannot trust, I cannot trust the
executive to, um, introduce secondary
legislation that enables our people.
Um,
and I guess what I'd like to say to you is that, um,
you know, I receive this individualized funding.
I'm part of this disability support services system.
Um, but I just feel like it's this malfunctioning cog in a failing
system. Um,
so we get some funding we're entitled to, but it fails to
provide anything that we really need.
And, but we still need it, and it just has this incredibly huge
administrative burden for a very small amount of money.
But we still need it.
Um, I was told by a professional that we should be receiving more
individualized funding,
um, comparable to what other families receive.
Um, that professional advocated to the NESC.
We were discharged out of that service.
Um, and then it took over a year of me continually
advocating. And, you know, this timing's great because I've just been told that
actually after all of that, um, our situation doesn't
provide enough alignment with the rules to receive more funding anyway.
Um, and then this cog, it misfits with other parts of the
systems to create even more failure.
Um, we've timed out, we've aged out of services that, you know, have been
starting to help.
Um, we've not been able to access services
because the consent thresholds were too demanding for us.
Um, we've had mental health and disability services
argue over responsibility to, to support us.
Utterly failed by the education system, and incurred a
technical debt because government systems don't align.
So it's exhausting. It shouldn't happen. Um, I'll stop there.
I've got more, but yeah.
Thank you. Maree Mills.
Thank you. Um, tena koe, Deidre. Welcome.
Thank you for your kōrero and your, um,
and your submission. You used the word trust, which is, um, just
pretty fundamental. And when that isn't there, um, and all of
the, the lines or that you've def- that you've
defined,
will more funding
change that?
Will, will-- Yeah, will that-- If we threw more money at you, would that be the
thing that undoes all of these things that you've just described as nearly
opaque and impenetrable?
Um, it's not just about money.
Mm.
Of course it's not.
Yeah.
But actually adequate funding-
Yeah
... you know, funding that people deserve to live a full life,
um, would build trust. And, you know, the ability to
actually build relationship with
professionals. Having the professionals adequately funded,
funded. All of that would help. But I just think, you know, everything
needs a full redesign.
Um, uh, I, uh, I didn't have time to go and check this out,
but I have heard that Enabling Good Lives was not fully
implemented.
Mm.
So I'd love you to please go and just check that out.
You know-
Make the system function. The systems function
Thank you.
Mm.
Yeah, and on that, I was thinking this a few times yesterday, but
sort of interested in what you're sharing with us because
two years ago, the sector was funded with $2.4 billion.
There's now been a $1.5 billion uplifts in the two years since then by this
government.
So it's
a big uplift. So it's like it's interesting to hear that
people are seeing this as a defunding measure when a $1.5
billion uplift in the last two years.
Well, I guess when it comes down to the personal level, it feels very
defunded.
Yeah.
Thank you very much for your submissions this afternoon. Appreciate it.
Thank you.
All right,
next on here is Lonnie and-
Yeah.
Or should we move to Rangimarie?
Rangimarie, you may come forward.
Good afternoon and welcome.
Thank you.
All right, well, we've got five minutes with you this afternoon.
Time is yours, so fill as you wish.
Thank you.
All of you here today, thank you for allowing me to
speak on this bill. Rangimarie. Sophie Jolly, "
Allenau Kituwaicato."
Kia ora. I'm grateful to be here today to speak on
behalf of my whanau, although I must admit, I would much
prefer to be speaking in consultation and not with the threat of
legislation looming over my every word, so I'm a little bit nervous.
Go for it.
It's a friendly space.
Good.
I'm coming today to speak as a mother, as a daughter, and as a wahine
Maori.
I'm a caregiving parent to an incredible, brave, and audacious 16-year-old
kohine.
And as a caregiving daughter to a 65-year-old retired nurse and incredible
nanny.
I'd like to take this opportunity to make visible to you my invisible
life and our invisible home.
I am working and on call 24 hours a day, seven
days a week, for years and years on end.
And I will spend the rest of my life in this role until I'm physically unable to do
so.
As a naturalized carer, I live with my mother and daughter, who are both
significantly paralyzed. My mother 16 years ago by a rare
cancer, my daughter by a cold when she was just nine years old.
At the time of my daughter's illness, I was a successful,
working single mother with a career, plans to buy a house, plans to
foster children, and plans to travel the world with my daughter when she was old
enough.
Overnight, our worlds turned upside down.
I won't get into the details of that event or that period of our lives, but I will
say that every day in the seven years since then,
it has been my absolute privilege to be everything she needs
because I am a bridge between her and the world.
My job is to meet her needs and somehow curate
independence in her future.
I'm on a three to four hourly routine of cares every part of every
day,
including being on hand throughout the night when she's in pain.
Most nights, I get about five to six hours of broken sleep.
I then wake up every morning and I start again.
Between these cares about two years ago, I miraculously managed our
lifestyles to the point where I could work again.
And fortunately, I found a job that allows me flexible hours and the ability to
work from home, but these jobs are very few and far between.
And as unsustainable as chronic burnout is, this is the only setup I'm
afforded.
I'm a naturalized carer, so there's no nurse to replace me.
No system is monitoring my wellbeing.
No one is covering my sick days or approving leave requests.
No one is authorizing my skills or my ability to do this job well.
No one is wondering whether or not I can provide adequate care.
No one is giving me a bonus for accurately predicting a severe medical event
and taking action to avoid it. No one has me even on a register
and asks what happens when I'm not there.
No one is monitoring them or me, and no one feels like they're looking at
us.
And no one's also asking who will take care of my daughter when I'm unable
to. No one's asking who she wants doing her
cares when she's old enough to consent to that.
And no one is asking how that person will be paid for their skills and labor.
No one's asking how a 38-year-old woman is supposed to survive working
24 hours a day, seven days a week, for years and years on end with zero
financial support to offset the ever-increasing cost of living.
And no one has yet realized that in some whanau, a naturalized caregiver might
exist for two people, and that person might also have to be
the breadwinner because our welfare system doesn't cover the cost of living.
Mm-hmm.
Especially when you have complex healthcare needs.
So my biggest deficit is actually time and not money, and I've used
that time today to come into this room so that you can see me and
other parents like me
who feel like they've been wrung out like a damp rag that nobody ever replaces
Because the issue that I'm finding is that this bill doesn't
actually represent our needs. It represents an avoidance of liability.
And so when that whanau won that Supreme Court case, we cried.
Mm. I cried. I felt like someone was going to see me. Mm.
And then all of a sudden this bill came and I felt completely invisible again.
I'm aware that I'm running out of time, but I just want you to know that whatever
decisions you make, I hope that if anything ever
happens to anyone in you or your whanau- Mm ...
the decisions you make today in this space
will help
to do something to offset that pain and that exhaustion, and that you don't find
yourselves and your whanau in this situation.
Thank you.
Thank you very much. Thank you for coming and sharing that with us.
Very articulately. Cheers.
Be well. Thank you. No, it's fine.
All right. And next speaker is Jane Curran.
Good afternoon and welcome, Jane. You've been here all day. Well, a lot of it.
I think at least-
Thank you. Cheers. You've drawn the short straw, you're going to have me the whole
time. So- And I've just found out I'm only getting five of my 10 minutes
so, I won't-
No. Everyone's getting five minutes
... I won't follow on with further pleasantries.
No, I'll-
All right
... sorry, can we pause that for one second?
Yep.
Just start again, please. Just so I could, you probably heard
this morning that we as a committee because of the constitutional separation of
powers between the courts and-
Oh, I'm very familiar with the constitutional separation of powers.
Cool.
Don't worry, I will not be naming any names.
It's just any active court case.
And yep. I'm not... Yes. Understood.
Far away.
On that basis, I'm a independent disability advocate, and
no one in this country knows more about this issue than I do. Bluntly.
So,
I've thrown away the script. You've got my five minutes worth
of submissions, written submissions.
I'm going to direct this particularly at the Act and the New Zealand First party,
because you two could actually make a difference.
I'm here to sort of wipe away some of the myths that I've been
hearing here for the last couple of days.
I'll start with the
topical issue of separation of powers and the explanation about
the role of the courts and the role of Parliament.
Your role here is to scrutinize
the bill. Legislation. Not to defend it, but that's all I've
been hearing, is defending this bill.
Am I aware that the Crown has put $2.5 billion
into the disabilities in the last few years?
Yes, I'm aware of that, but that's only because you had to, and it's only because
you've gutted disabilities in the last 30 years.
Between 1999 and 2016, the
disability budget actively went backwards.
In 1992, the disability budget was $1 billion.
Index adjusted, that was just under $2 billion.
So you can see we're already streets behind because what are we at the moment?
At 4 billion. The reason I'm pointing this at New Zealand First and Act is
number one, Act are a helpful on disabilities.
And two, you two actually have the capacity to sway the--
because this is clearly, five minutes worth of scrutiny for
each person means that the decision has already been made.
I'm not at all convinced that there's any scrutiny going
on here today. So the billion dollars that we were getting back in
pales. The budget, $2.5 billion in the
last two or three years means nothing.
You will never catch up on the decline in the gutting of the
disability budget over a period of a good nearly 20 years,
off the back of family carers. The exploitation of
family carers is what has made the disability
sector tick over. I've had to shove my
fist into my mouth listening to some of the
organizations sitting here before you today.
The Disabled People Assemblies put up witnesses against the family
carers in the Employment Court. So,
there has been a huge polarization and it has been
the family carers. They're the people I want you to walk away from-
Yeah
...
over the next few days and discuss.
I don't want you looking at the organizations.
I want the people who have sat here before you today and cried.
That man I sat with today, I've never met him before in my life.
But I can tell you I've met dozens like him.
I take telephone calls at two o'clock in the morning about suicide.
I talk about suicide and murder like other people talk about the weather.
That are the family carers that I work with, and
I have worked with solidly since 2014.
Because I have seen what a disgusting system we have.
And frankly, this committee, your predecessors, you have a lot to
answer for. We shouldn't be sitting here today in front of a social services
committee and community committee.
We should be sitting in front of the education and workforce committee.
So we're before the wrong committee to start with.
The fact of the matter is, the
Supreme Court are not meddling in disability
policy as has been conveyed by government.
And I'm genuinely disappointed because I have to say, I will say about Minister
Upston, she is the one minister who's come along in the last 20 years and said,
"Something's not right here. Why are the people who need the most supports
not getting it?"
So that is why we're sitting around this table today, because
unfortunately, as is the way, having
started off down the right path, she has been diverted, and I should
imagine it will be by our lived experience policy advisors who've
said, "Let's pull this together. There's no framework for
disabilities." That is,
in modern-day parlance, BS. There is a
disability framework for Africa.
We've got the Disability Person's Community and
Welfare Act from 1975. We've got the Health and
Disability Safety Act. We've got the Public Health and Disability Act,
replaced by Pae Ora with its dis-
The only definition of what disability support services is, and that is
about to be trashed by the new definition
to be replaced by this bill. We have the Resident
Services and Disability- we have the Residential Services and
Disability Support Services Act.
We have standards, we have the Crimes Act, we have New Zealand Bora.
What the Supreme Court did, respectfully, because I
strongly suspect people do not understand this sitting around the table,
was all it did was it looked at government policy and it said, "You are
not following the law." That is all it said.
The court cases aren't over. We're back before the Employment
Court in September. That is why this is being rushed through.
That is why, because you're terrified you're going to have
20, 30 odd people in the ERA, some who have sat there for
nearly seven years. They haven't rushed off and thought, "Oh, ripper, I'm going to
file in the ERA and make my first million." They haven't done that since the
Supreme Court handed down their decision. They did it seven years ago.
They have been sitting there waiting, in good faith, in a holding
pattern while the Fleming matter went through to the Supreme
Court. And every
government, of all hues, no one government rises
above the other in this area. Every government of all hues has done their
best to delay everything. I've been involved in court
cases for a long time, and I can tell you, I have never...
Your lawyers, $5 million. Is that a waste of money?
No, that's not a waste of money. But
trying paying out a few family carers.
If you were to pay out everyone sitting in the Employment Relations Authority at
the moment, I doubt if it would come to 50 million.
There's 20, 30 families. It wouldn't come to 50 million.
But if it came to 50 million, so what? You guys are sat back.
You've got policy. You've had the minister, fair dues to her,
she's gone off and she actually has, of the three
reviews she did, I would call two of them
genuinely independent. Ironically, the one that's quoted the most is the
one I would say is least independent, but that's neither here nor there.
It still raised very valid points.
The fact of the matter, the other two, the Link report and the Nash report, along
with the NASC report that sits at the back of the complex
care submissions, they actually reveal the
real picture. Hundreds of millions of dollars of procurement
fraud in disability support services over the last 27 years.
Now a navy boat sinks
a year or so ago, $100 million. We rush out within days, we've got a
judicial review happening of it. What happens about the
procurement fraud? Nothing has gone out to
tender in the last 27 years in disability.
That is why we have such a shocking system, because we have a system
made up of
patronage, conflict of interest, you name it.
And that is where Minister Upston is
dangerously close to identifying what the real issues are.
And that is why you have the,
what I refer to as nothing about us without us band
appearing before you, because they are terrified their conflict that they have
managed to so carefully protect for the last how many years, is
about to be blown open by this
act. This bill is the wrong bill. If
the minister is genuine about bringing
clarity, transparent and fairness, you would go back and you
would look at all of those bills that already sit there and you would say, "Okay,
how can we turn this into something that actually works for everybody?" You
wouldn't bring along another bill so that it can be put with all the
pile of other bills that will get breached.
I can guarantee you right now for nothing, I have read your bill, and I will
spend the next 15 years, you can take this to the bank, I will spend the
next 15 years in court fighting. So it won't cost you
$5 million, it won't cost you $20 million, it won't cost you the $50
million that you might get away with paying out the
people currently in the ERA. People haven't rushed off to sign up
to the ERA. Why not? Because you've heard the parents.
They say, "I just want to be a parent.
I don't want to be a 24-hour exploited slave." But that is what
they are. And the supreme irony is that we are
sitting here today while in another select committee room, they're
discussing the Modern Slavery Bill.
And the Modern Slavery Bill definition of exploitation,
if you pass this bill, it will make this
government the biggest breacher of the
Modern Slavery Bill,
because every aspect of that exploitation and
servitude, the government will be breaching by passing this bill.
So I'm preaching to the converted.
There are some people who are against it, some people who are for it.
And those people who are for it, I genuinely accept that you mean well and
you believe that this will make a difference.
But I can tell you right now for nothing, you know nothing.
You need to scrutinize. Get out there and
scrutinize. Sitting here and trying to convince us that lots of
money has been put into a system that is utterly broken.
Not one of those parents who sat in front of you and cried has been
able to say, "Oh yeah, no, I remember.
I did get a few lazy 100,000 out of that billion dollars over the last year."
Jane, I have let you go 10 minutes. I think we have to draw close there.
Yeah.
But thank you for your passionate submission.
I agree.
And can I just end by saying, I hate being referred
to as passionate. I am not passionate.
Yeah.
To be passionate suggests you love something.
I hate what I do,
and I'm angry. So take that to the bank.
Angry submission.
You know I do.
Thank you.
You know I do. I don't mind.
Next matter, or do we have Lily?
We could always go to the next matter in person and circle back.
Okay, cool. Yep. All right. Let's do Lesley. Is Lesley available?
And that's been very-
She's come from-
What's your name?
Ah.
Geez.
Can we move?
Yeah.
The same submissions follow.
Very
good.
Welcome, Leslie. I hear you come from all the way from Motueka. Is that correct?
That's correct.
That's impressive.
Well-
It's been a long day.
I can imagine. I don't see the sun that you brought with you, but
...
Thanks.
But welcome. We have you for five minutes-
Okay
... so fire away when you're ready.
To the cohort of chair and members of the committee-
You know
...
thank you for the opportunity for making the decision on the disability support
services.
My name is Leslie Jackson.
And I live with progressive
sorry.
Just when you're ready.
I live with progressive multiple sclerosis and have done for the last 15 years.
Enabling Good Lives originated as a community-led
initiative,
strongly supported in action by the government under Tariana,
sorry, I can't pronounce the name, Tariana Turia
in 2011.
Mm.
It has since received bipartisan cross-party endorsement
as a guiding framework for disability support system transformation
in New Zealand. Governments of different political stripes have continued to
reference and fund its principles.
In March 2025, the government made an abrupt change to flexible
disability funding without meaningful
consultation
with the disability committee. The impact were immediate and severe.
Across New Zealand, parents and whānau describe being left in
shock when respite care for disabled was suddenly
removed.
These were not minor adjustments.
They would directly contradict the principles of Enabling Good Lives
the successive governments had previously endorsed.
What was taken was not fully restored until the 1st of April
2026.
The disability community was assured that this
unilateral cut would not happen again,
yet here we are considering a bill that risks repeating the same
mistakes.
Clause 82A of the bill states that family
groups have primary responsibility for their disabled relatives
where appropriate.
This wording raises concerns for many of us.
I ask the committee to carefully consider the evidence of overseas.
A recent UK study by Professor Gavin Giovannoni, Chair of
Neurology, Bartholomew's Hospital and Queen Mary University
London, examined domestic violence experienced by
women with multiple sclerosis.
Among 275 married women with MS, 53
reported psychological abuse, 63 economic
abuse, 43% physical abuse, sorry
the percentages, 20% sexual abuse.
In New Zealand, approximately 5,000 people live with MS,
of whom 3,750 are women.
Many disabled people already rely on family members
and can be especially vulnerable
when they have limited choice on who provides that care.
Forcing greater reliance on family carers without guidance cho-
choice is not empowering.
It can expose people to risk,
erode independence, and place unsustainable
pressure on families.
Disabled people must retain the right to choose their support and their
carers, including the ability to use flexible
funding for paid support when that is what their informed
preference is.
I recommend, I urge committee to amend the bill.
Disabled people keep the choice and control of their supports.
Disability funding remains generally flexible and
protected, and
protected from sudden top-down restrictions
as has happened.
Ensure the principle of Enabling Good Lives are embedded
in a legislation, not undermined by it.
We have lived experiences and evidence from both New Zealand and
overseas that can help get this right.
I ask that you return to the table with the dis- with the
disabilit-
disabled community, and listen carefully.
Design a system that truly enables good lives rather than
placing new risks and burdens on the very people it's meant to support.
I thank you for your time.
Thank you very much. Appreciate you coming and making a submission, coming all the
way from Motueka. So it's a long way to come.
It's not an easy journey, so thank you-
It is. Thank you
... and sharing that story. And thank for your brief written submission as well.
You're welcome.
Yes.
Thank you, Leslie.
Um, do we have Louise? I
don't-
We're going to stick to the plans.
Okay.
Talk through the lot?
One line at a time
Oh, good afternoon, Lily. Welcome.
Kia ora.
No, kia ora. We can see you. We can hear you loud and clear.
So five minutes is yours to fill as you wish.
Thank you. Tena koutou katoa. My name is Lily Parehall
Butcher, and I strongly oppose this bill.
Good view.
As
I explained in my written submission, I believe this bill will cause suffering for
disabled people and their loved ones.
I'd like to talk about the notion of care.
I've thought about it a lot as I helped care for my grandmother in the last years
of her life. In order for care to exist, so must trust.
To have a good quality of life, disabled people must be able to receive care from
people they trust. Requiring disabled people to rely on family support
before being eligible for state support takes away choice and
agency over these decisions. Would you want to rely on a first cousin you
haven't seen in 20 years to provide care for you?
That's what this bill could require disabled people to do.
At the same time as this bill would take away disabled people's choice over who
might provide them with care, it also refuses to support the whanau who would be
required to act as caregivers. Denying family caregivers rights as
workers and financial compensation for the work they do will undermine their
ability to care for their loved ones.
Even disabled people who would be eligible to apply for state support under
the system proposed by this bill would likely have increased difficulty accessing
the support. The Citizen Advice Bureau's 2020 report into digital
exclusion in government services highlighted the challenges disabled people face
when applying for support, as well as barriers they experience when trying to meet
their obligations or claim entitlements.
Application processes are already often inaccessible, and disabled people
specifically may require specialized software or equipment to navigate digital
application processes. Adding further layers of bureaucracy and potentially time
pressure into this process will increase the administrative burden on disabled
people to apply. As such, those who would be eligible for support may miss out, and
even those who are able to access support may suffer other harms as a result of the
process. For instance, people who experience stress-induced
seizures or chronic fatigue would likely experience negative health
outcomes as a result of applying under the proposed system.
In my written submission, I was speaking mainly
from my experience as a caregiver, but I'd also like to speak from my personal
experience as a disabled person.
To me, I think this bill is a deeply shameful piece of
legislation.
It is a transparent attempt
to make disabled people pay for the consequences of the
Crown's own actions. The attempt to
foreclose any possibility of
caregivers being provided with support to care for their loved ones.
And beyond that, there is also a lack,
I think, of belief in the ability of disabled people to live good
lives.
Restricting the options that people have over who provides them with
care or how they support themselves will impact people's options
and opportunities in their lives.
One of my close friends
moved to Wellington for university in order to be able to study what she wanted to
study. And because of her cerebral
palsy, which produces stress-induced seizures, if she
had to work full time as well as study full time, she would not be able to do
both, and
she would not been able to afford to study if she had not been able to receive
disability support. And so she would have been forced to stay
at home
and be looked after by her mum, and she's just completed
her degree and has in fact won a really prestigious scholarship.
So she's had all sorts of opportunities and has contributed to our
community in Wellington in all sorts of ways since she arrived here several years
ago. And she has been able to do that because she has had
a bit of choice over how she lives her life.
I think
forcing people
to
have a lack of choice over how they live their lives really restricts
people's opportunities-
Right
... and forecloses on their potential as people.
And this in particular, I feel
could breach the Articles 19 and 28 of the
United Nations Convention on the Rights of Disabled People.
I think the committee should think very carefully before proceeding with this bill.
I think it should be rejected.
And in particular, the clauses related to means testing
and
the fact that
there are no specific elements of the-- The fact that
eligibility requirements be left up to subsequent legislation, I think is very
suspect. And I think that it should follow the
guidelines as suggested by CSS Disability Action.
Thank you for listening.
Thank you very much, Lily. Thanks for sharing your experience and also
for the support you had for your grandmother as well.
So both experiences. Appreciate that submission and the recommendations you've
made. We'll take those into consideration.
Thank you.
Very much.
All right. The next submitter we have
available, I believe, is Kate. So can we bring Kate online?
Good evening, Kate. Thanks for being available a little bit early.
If you're-
No problem
... you're ready to go ahead, we'll
jump into it.
Sounds good.
Tena koutou katoa. Thank you for this opportunity.
I work at Te Wananga Aronui o Tamaki Makaurau or AUT
in the Critical Disability Studies space.
I've worked as a physio, and I live with complex health conditions myself.
I want to really acknowledge the wisdom shared by users of
disability support services and carers, and I really hope that the committee here
can feel the weight of their concerns and let that guide some of your
decision-making and scrutiny of this bill.
While I don't use disability support services, I, like all New Zealanders, have
a stake in this. None of us, none of your voters or constituents,
know when we might need ourselves to rely on those
services.
So to respond to your questions, I'm concerned that this bill positions
disabled people and their carers as economics burdens on the
state, on the budget.
There's a long legislative history of this in New Zealand and in other
English-speaking countries, right back to the time of the Industrial
Revolution.
But legislation and funding arrangements can and do look different in
overseas territories, for example.
Yesterday, I noticed the committee mentioning, and today again, the
additional funding, billions of dollars in allocation.
But my understanding is that covers increased costs rather than to enhance
services, and it's a very small proportion of our total government
annual budget.
In addition, it was said that some disabled people can and do work,
and that workers should contribute economically to their own support services
use. But working or not, disabled people have lower
incomes and higher costs, have poorer health outcomes,
have poorer educational outcomes, have poorer quality and
often inaccessible housing, and have poorer access to transport
into our public spaces. Those outcomes are not a
consequence of the disabling condition that they themselves have, but are
reflective of having been underserved by government and society for
generations.
On their reading of this bill, teachers and health professionals that I know
who are also carers of dependents have told me they worry that
sustainable employment will be even harder for them.
Combined, all of these issues mean that earning a sufficient income with enough
surplus to cover any impairment-related costs or equipment,
or caregiving costs would be almost impossible.
So what would I like to see? I'd like to see this bill completely
rejected by all parties in the Select Committee.
The disability community feels under attack with very real safety
concerns. For example, about tamariki traveling to school,
in alignment with changes to the total mobility scheme subsidy,
and with sudden political and funding decisions being made about them or
without them.
These actions have breached trust and good faith between the government, between
ministers, and the disability community.
In addition, practicing health professionals have told me
they despair the system they now work in.
They're struggling to turn up to their job because of wait lists and funding
constraints and unfilled frontline positions.
They keep on working, often at their own expense of their own health and
well-being and families. Or they leave and know that their position will
remain empty, further restricting disabled people's access to
rehabilitation and equipment or adaptive technologies, particularly
in rural remote areas that are difficult to staff
already.
So my proposed solution,
I'd really like to encourage all of you to use the Select Committee process as an
opportunity
to hear, to learn, and to start again, to develop new and better
policy in relation to disability support.
I'd encourage each of you to remember your ideals of freedom, of
justice, of care for others, of the reason that you became politicians,
and to imagine what would be possible if you put those ideals first.
Thinking of your disabled constituents and voters as interesting people,
who, if their needs are well met, can live ordinary and meaningful and
wonderful lives.
I'd like to see carers, family carers, be acknowledged
and appreciated financially and legislatively and beyond.
I would like you to be good stewards of our taxes and to notice, for example,
which private companies are profiting from the current status quo, because
it's certainly not disabled people or their carers.
I'd like you to work together to develop great world-leading accessibility
legislation where diverse access needs are met as default
rather than as afterthought. I'd like the government to properly fund
Whakaha. I'd like a transformation of our fragmented health and
education and welfare and justice systems so that disabled
people don't have to spend so much time and effort educating
professionals and traversing systemic gaps and failures
themselves as individuals or as family units.
I'd like you to take a critical disability lens to each and every piece of
legislation and policy in government and within your own political party,
so that disability issues become front and center and embedded as due
process.
I'd like you to consider how to meet the cultural and language needs of diverse
communities, including tangata Whakaha Maori, Whanau Ora,
Pacific disabled peoples and their aiga, and migrant and refugee communities,
and weave this into explicit disability-related policy with humility and
awareness.
And I'd like you to explore how the Crown may offer respectful kawenatanga
while respecting tino rangatiratanga and Te Tiriti o Waitangi.
So in summary, I'm concerned that this bill is deficient.
I encourage you all to reject this bill, and I suggest a new start,
working towards Aotearoa, New Zealand, being a world leader in the disability
issue space, drawing on our common values for decency and
for fairness.
So to do that, I suggest that the minister and this government needs to undertake
a process of reflection and of learning, including that of our awful,
horrific disability history, and a listening to this
community and a rebuilding of trust.
I'm very happy to continue in conversation regarding any of this, now or in the
future, and I'm very happy to take questions. Thank you.
Thank you very much, Kate. I think we are a bit over time, but I'll
let you get through it all. But look, thank you for coming online and making a
submission this afternoon. Appreciate it.
Thank you very much.
Do we have...
We will finally move the remaining motion, too.
Shall we suspend for five minutes and just see if we can get it?
Good afternoon, Barry. There we're coming up.
Hello, Ken.
Oh, good day there. Yep.
Am I visible?
Yes, you are visible, and we can hear you loud and clear. So, welcome.
Thanks for making yourself available. We have you for five minutes this afternoon.
The time is yours when you're ready.
Okay. Thank you very much.
Well, thank
you very much, Chairman. Thank you for the opportunity to present to you on
this bill, which has the potential, I think, to impact
significantly on the lives of disabled people in New Zealand.
As noted in my written submission, which you have, I'm the father of a now adult
son born with Down syndrome in 1980.
So in part, I'm here to speak for him.
My concern is how the contents of the legislation will help him and his
peers,
affect him and his peers,
as an intellectually handicapped adult who seeks an independent life
with an extended family framework but is unable to support himself because of his
disability. So firstly,
I'm concerned that the extended nature of the obligation that the legislation
seems to provide is that it requires family
members to provide the first tier of support.
I have no objection in principle to that.
But the definition of family group is very widely drawn.
Minister, it seems, will have almost an unbounded ability, it seems to me,
reading the legislation, to effectively,
and I'm using ACC as an example, but interrogate me and my close
family,
and also those of other family members, grandparents, uncles, aunties, and even
first cousins. And the point I'm making is that goes a long way from the
central core family that we're operating under.
The manner in which the rules are set to operate are
effectively at large. That are there are no limits within the bill, it seems, on
the extent of the intrusion into our wider family relationships with our son
and the extent to which those members are able or willing to assist in supporting
him. And this intrusion into my widening family group by government,
I
have some objection to.
I think it's potentially divisive, damaging, and unwelcome in
my view, unnecessary. There's other ways of doing it, I think.
And
such processes will put significant additional pressures
on families that because by virtue of having a member with
a disability are already under some pressure from society, and that's just the
way it is. I know that from my own experience.
So to put it into context, I think we've got to think about these sort of family
support environments in two phases.
When a disabled person such as my son was at school, the local
community and the education system provided support for him.
Demands on the family unit were akin to the natural support that any
family has, so the support requirements were
well known, and they were shared between the system and ourselves as a
family. However, when this disabled person becomes an adult, 18
to 20, he or she makes
a very different set of demands on his family and the community than doing
than do the regular members of the family who are becoming independent.
And natural support for the disabled member in such cases can
become at significant cost to the family
concerned in terms of time, resources, and
opportunities forgone. And don't misunderstand that last one.
People, families have to make decisions around
the abilities of the people that are in their family to whether they
go overseas, take promotions, do other things.
Quite a major factor in our life in this
case. Accordingly, the machinery around the natural support
sharing, I think needs to be carefully designed and proper
consultation with those that are affected does need to occur.
I don't want to be overly critical, but this legislation
came on us somewhat as a surprise.
I emphasize I don't think it's a ledger-based, cost-accounted, or
bureaucratic process. It's one where there's needs discretion,
flexibility, and judgment. And the
materials in the legislation, the way it's framed, seem to
be very prescriptive. I'm an engineer.
I know about performance-based regulation, and it's quite a different
level than prescriptive-based regulation.
So I was looking for some evidence that there's some discretion and judgment
involved. I couldn't see any in the bill that were there.
Secondly, the
We have a minister at the moment who's indicated to us that she's a
supporter of enabling good policy,
and that's very good. But future ministers responsible for the implementation
of this bill will need to
have no doubt about the overarching purpose.
And if we don't set the legislation up right with some avoidance of
doubt clauses in it,
then the
disability support services stream and the system
will get compromised because it won't be clear where it sits with respect
to families and the obligations of the partnership we're talking
about.
I emphasize that there must be a partnership between
families because of the bill's purpose and principles and
the government agencies involved.
It is a relationship that needs to be nurtured.
It must be based on trust and experience,
and consequently, that's why the consultation issue is quite important.
I think that
the MSD minister needs to recognize the
significant value of contributions that are made by families,
material and other,
as they support members with disabilities.
I don't know how many of your committee have firsthand knowledge of being in
families with this, but it can be very demanding and, in some cases,
life-changing. So
forms of intrusion of those families has to be handled very
carefully.
I ask members of your committee to put partisan politics aside and be
brave and act in the interests of all New Zealanders when reporting back on this
bill. It is quite an important piece of legislation.
It's a complex area. You've got a sector that, to some degree,
is already under pressure, and this has
got the potential to make it quite a lot more difficult.
I believe you need to accurately record the
concerns of families, including disabled people themselves, when
you
report back to the House on this, thinking and keeping in mind the
downstream consequences of something which, if not carefully
drafted, could be quite damaging. Thank you very much for your time.
Thank you, Barry. We are out of time, but I sort of want to just get your quick
response to this. You raise an interesting point.
Now, I didn't draft this, so I have to just guess at the intention of the drafters,
but they seem to have drawn a broad definition of family,
whanau, and other family groups, as you've identified.
I guess they're trying to identify that there are different sort of arrangements in
New Zealand. But your point is that it's too broad and creates
maybe some unintended consequences.
Do you have any recommendation on how we could narrow that,
taking into account-
Yeah, I think you've somehow or other got to tier it.
You've got to have a
situation where you define close family, and that would be
parents and siblings, I think. Then you've got a further
layer out.
If you were going to inquire as to the ability of others to be
involved, you've got to investigate, for instance, where
that further out group, some of them might be in Australia, they might be all
sorts of places.
You've actually got to, I think, categorize that support
framework. In some instances, for instance,
a next-door neighbor will be closer than a first cousin.
I took exception to the first. I think the first cousin sort of thing was just
going far too far. I think the siblings
is about the limit,
and at that point, I think you need to sort of start
standing back and think about what families are.
Now, I realize that different cultures have a slightly
different approach. I'm just talking about a
European-New Zealand situation where Travis has
three siblings, and we're all very much in the support
network for him. But if we went out to his cousins and things like
that, it would be very hard.
All right. Thank you very much, Barry.
Thank you for your submission and sharing
your thoughts on that, and something that we haven't heard yet.
So that's-- Yeah, appreciate it.
Okay.
Right, our next submitter I believe we have available is Colleen Brown.
Yes, she's coming up.
Oh,
brilliant.
Good afternoon, Colleen. Welcome.
Hello. Thank you very much.
I'll just rattle through mine same way as Barry's done his.
So thank you very much for the opportunity to address you today.
I'm here today as the mother of four adult children, one of whom,
Travis, has Down syndrome. I want to make
five points.
Point one is I included our son's name in my submission
deliberately
because this proposed legislation seems to deliberately deny Travis
his voice, his agency, and the voice of disabled people,
apart from making a written submission to this committee.
Travis has a voice. He makes decisions about his life, and we
support him to do that. He has rights, and importantly, he has
a valued place in our family and in society.
The minister has publicly stated she supports the principles
of enabling good lives, and if that is so, the minister
can't say, "I
value disabled people," and then in this bill exclude their
voices from the very legislation that so intimately affects them.
You can't have it both ways.
Point two, underlying this bill is the premise that our son,
our children's brother, is a cost, a burden.
Not an economic unit, and consequently is of a little value.
That's the way many in the disability sector have interpreted this bill.
It may not be the intent of it, but for us, always fighting
for inclusion, that's the message it sends to us.
We as a family have missed out on many opportunities.
We've chosen to be actively involved in our son's life and still
are. Even though he flats with his mates, I spend at
least half a day a week supporting him, and often more.
But there is a cost, and it's not just a financial one.
Point three, we've always viewed our relationship with the
state as a partnership.
We do our bit, the state does its bit.
And like all other citizens, we have that relationship.
But apart from the fact that our support for Travis has never gone away for
46 years,
usually your support for your children
dwindles when a person reaches the age of 18 or their
20s. The untie whanau support for Travis is for life.
We expect the state to be there in partnership for its most
vulnerable citizens. This bill does not send that message to me.
The definition of family, what we refer to as natural supports in the disability
sector, in the 46 years I've been involved with many disability
organizations and parent groups, I have never met a parent who's not
wanted the best for their disabled family member.
Their contributions are huge and should be acknowledged and valued.
To have the family listed out in the way it is in the bill seems
rather contemptuous of the years of support willingly given to this
country by families.
Mm.
So I ask you, why include that list and at the same time exclude
disabled people's voices?
The bill stigmatizes us as a family even more than we are
now. Always seeking that extra support from a huge list of
people. It's like going around with a begging bowl. Back to the charity discourse.
Point five, the very disturbing secondary legislation, the extraordinary powers
given to the minister, which might not be invoked by this minister, but it leaves
it wide open in the future.
Of particular concern, and no doubt it's been mentioned by many others, is
income and asset testing along with decisions around a person's disability.
That's very worrying, especially when linked to the definition of family.
Are you really going to ask my children or professionals to give up part of their
professional lives to be their brother's caregivers?
DSS has historically always been needs-based.
This apparent change has never been signaled in any meetings or
communications from the government.
Some laws do have asset and means testing, but not disability support
services. So why introduce it in this bill right now?
It's very tough out there in the disability sector.
We are all survivors of, at times, a very indifferent
system. This bill has created a huge amount of
anxiety. What I do know is, in the 46 years I've been
supporting Travis, we've had 17 education ministers,
13 MSD ministers, 14 disability issues
ministers, and 20 ministers of health.
And what I also know is that when you've all retired and look back at your
legacy in Parliament, think about these two things.
Will this bill be a moment of pride for you?
And also know that in the disability sector, we know that politicians
come and go, but families are there forever. 46 years.
Mm.
This bill signals a lifetime of having conditional relationships, asking
extended families, "Can you, would you support us in any way?"
And not knowing how the state would carry on supporting you, if at all.
So I ask you in all conscience, where is the hope?
Mm.
Where is the value?
And if you vote for this bill in its current form, is it really, is this the
best you can do?
Mm.
Thank you, Colleen. We are over time, and I'll just say questions to crack it.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Quick question. Thanks, Colleen.
Your third point, to remove all reference to secondary
legislation. Now, the minister's rationale for this is that she's creating the
framework and then the detail will come later.
Are you arguing that it should be the other way around, that the detail should be
consulted on out through engagement with disability communities and
then written into both the framework in detail interlinked?
The devil's always in the detail. We know this.
We've dealt with policies over the years.
And so yes, we do need to know what the detail is.
It is very disturbing having that secondary layer. We don't know what's coming.
We don't know how it's going to be interpreted.
And while this m- this minister may have the very best of intentions, five
years down the track, 10 years down the track, when you have-- you've got your
lovely pensions and you're sitting there thinking about what you did in the past,
we are the ones fighting for it. No.
We've got to know now what's what.
Mm. Thank you.
Thank you, Colleen. I should just say, parliamentarians don't get pensions
any different than any other citizen does. Just for the record.
But point taken. Thank- thanks for making your submission.
You're welcome.
Unless you're paying.
All right. Do we have-
More things.
Yeah.
Linda.
Okay, Linda.
Sorry.
Just getting-
Oh. Oh, there we go. We can see you loud and clear, and we can hear you nice and
clearly as well. Welcome, Linda. Thanks for appearing for our committee this
afternoon. The time is yours when you're ready.
Thank you.
I have a few points to make, and I'm happy to take questions because you've read
my statement. So,
first of all, I just want to make the point that families of people with
disabilities are some of the very hardest working people in Aotearoa.
We often think that farmers are hardworking.
Tell you what, families of people with disabilities work a whole lot more
as well as that. And it doesn't stop As
families will have told you, there is no retirement age.
There is no three weeks off or any weeks off in a year.
You can't just step away from it. And families stay connected
regardless of what else happens around.
So they know their responsibilities and they don't shirk from them.
It's rather disingenuous to suggest that this is a new idea, that
families should take responsibility, and it feels rather insulting to
families who are there day in, day out, 24/7,
regardless of what else happens. I've been a sibling, am a
sibling, and a grandmother, and so I can tell you, it
is a commitment, a long-term, lifetime commitment,
and families live up to that. It's hard work.
As people will tell you,
it often means stepping aside from other opportunities and committing
to family members. So what families seek is consistency and support
from government, and that can be hard to come by.
Consistency means knowing what's coming next.
When things change
often, as they do, that makes life more difficult than it needs to
be. So my reading of the purposes of this bill is to limit
financial risk to government,
to establish a three-year pathway to get legislation
framework, and to manage DSS budgets.
Now, I can relate to some of that. It is important.
However, I would suggest that it's time to acknowledge that there
is a need for increases in funding within
DSS budget. It just isn't enough, and it hasn't been enough for some
time. So in developing frameworks going
forward, this needs to be kept in mind,
and I would suggest that families need to
have a voice in that,
as do people with disabilities.
Because without this being done in a thoughtful
way,
the
out costs will be far more expensive for government.
I have seen how when these costs are cost shifted to
other parts of government, and they will be,
it actually costs a whole lot more.
So investment now and upfront in a meaningful way would be a better
outcome, I would suggest. I'm happy to take questions.
Mm. Thanks for that, Linda. Appreciate that.
Actually, just on that, a sort of question on my mind is, obviously,
this is about DSS-funded disability support services.
And I note Section 8 talks about
that the ministry or contract provider must take into account
other publicly funded sources as well as family
and as well as their community. So, I'm just wondering if you can just, from your
experience, just talk us a little bit through what the differences between the
DSS-funded services are and the other publicly funded services are that are sort
of typically accessed.
Well, obviously, education's one of the earlier ones in the life
of a child with a disability. When there are artificial
boundaries between that, then it can be a case of families trying to
battle between these services. And there should be a
linking up. So, where therapy is provided in
education and not in health or not in DSS, there's a tension
there. Those are services that need to link up more.
Equipment services,
when they stand alone, make life difficult for families to negotiate.
And DSS funding has a look across some of those,
but over time, we've created these boundaries between them.
I've seen in health where
DHB services or Ministry of Health services end up picking up
the shortfall when nothing else is available.
And so the cost in health is way more than a cost in
DSS. And so again, working together.
I know that there's at least 100 people sitting in hospital services now
who have a disability and don't belong in a mental health services,
but they're in the most expensive place they could ever be.
And so we need to work together. If DSS was able to
provide the support in the community, health would not be carrying that
burden. At the moment, we've cost shifted it into another place, a
really much more expensive place.
Adviser.
That was very helpful context, and I thank you for that.
And thank you again for making submission this afternoon.
Thank you.
Appreciate it.
Yeah. That's really
good.
We have Amy.
Amy? Great.
Good evening, Amy. Welcome.
Good morning.
Yep. No, we can hear and see you, so great.
The time is yours when you're ready to go.
Thank you.
So my name's Amy Taylor.
Multigenerational disability has shaped my life.
I'm a disabled person living with multiple sclerosis,
and I'm also autistic. These experiences shape how I move
through the world and what I'm showing up here for
today. I come from a line of disabled people.
So I grew up alongside my mother, a feisty,
unapologetically disabled woman living with advanced MS.
In my late teens, I became her carer.
This was the late 1990s,
when the lack of a lot of disability support services meant
that we were put in that position.
That experience has had a lasting impact on my education,
my income, and the career choices available to me.
It also put significant strain on my mum and I's relationship,
which became really unhealthy for a long time.
Today, I work three days a week. This is what I can
sustainably manage, and if I work more, I enter cycles of
burnout and symptom flare-ups that render me completely useless.
I'm also raising two disabled children with complex health
needs. They can't attend school full-time,
but they're curious, bright, motivated to learn.
They want to contribute to society.
They just can't do it at the pace that non-disabled people are
expected to. And when I look at their future, I feel really
worried,
because this bill assumes something that my life tells me is not true.
It assumes that families can carry the load.
This bill places responsibility for care first on whānau
and reinforces ideas of natural supports, but I've lived what that
looks like. It looks like children becoming
carers. It looks like intergenerational poverty.
It looks like people having to choose between their health and their economic
survival.
Because when the state steps back, someone else carries the cost,
and that cost is already being carried by
disabled people and their families.
It frames disability support as a contribution, not as a right,
not as an entitlement. That matters, because a
contribution can be reduced, a contribution can be withheld.
A contribution does not guarantee dignity.
But disabled people's lives and wellbeing should not depend on what is
left over. It is a matter of human rights.
We've recently had Supreme Court recognition that some family carers
are workers. It acknowledged the real labor of care.
This bill moves away from that recognition.
I have lived that work. I still do. It is constant, it is
highly skilled, and it shapes entire lives.
I've serious concerns about how this bill is structured.
Much of the real decision-making, who gets support, what they
receive, and how is left to regulations rather than the bill
itself. This creates too much uncertainty.
It means the rules that shape my life can change without
meaningful scrutiny and without disabled people being meaningfully
involved,
and many in our community already feel that consultation has been lacking.
Finally, I want to speak plainly about independence.
When support systems rely more heavily on family, they
assume those families are safe and able to provide care,
and that is not always true. Not all disabled people have safe
or supportive whānau, and when survival is tied to
family or partners, people can be forced into
unsafe or abusive situations.
That is a loss of independence. It is a loss of choice,
and it is a human rights issue. Disabled people
need to be seen as having inherent value.
When you're not worrying about how you're going to feed yourself that week, you can
use your strengths to contribute meaningfully to communities.
That is what a good support system should do.
I want my children to grow up in a system that recognizes their value,
supports their independence, and does not limit their future
based on how much they can work or how much their family can carry.
A disability support services legal framework is needed, but this
bill in its current form should be withdrawn and redrafted in
genuine partnership.
What disabled people need is certainty.
We need our rights, as outlined by the United Nations Convention on the
Rights of Persons with Disabilities, to be strengthened, protected,
embedded in legislation so that they are not put at risk by
changing political parties.
All right. Great. No, thank you very much, Amy.
I appreciate you coming and making a submission
to the committee this evening and sharing the experience of you and your family.
Thank you.
Cheers.
We have anyone else?
We have
and Natalia
coming. Okay, so we've one who couldn't make it and one who
we gave them an out to reschedule.
One. One couldn't make it and one we've made reschedulable.
Is Amy to come? All right. I think that- That's all.
That's all we've got. All right. Well, that concludes us for this evening on
the public session.
We'll move private. So we'll move to private session now. Okay.